Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
is part two of this mini-series
looking at the Ku Klux Klan.
In the last episode, we looked at the
three major historical phases of the
KKK: its birth and rise in the post-civil
war south during the Reconstruction
Era, its anti-immigrant resurrection in
the 1920s, and its final wave against
the Civil Rights era of the 1960s.
Today, in part-two, we’re looking
at what came after that third and
final wave, and what the Klan, or
more specifically, what one man and
his leadership did as it declined.
Before this man took over, the
Ku Klux Klan had always operated
in secrecy, hidden behind hoods
and robes and the cover of night.
But as the Klan began its slow and steady
decline, one man tried to change this.
He tried to make the Klan - and
its ideas - more mainstream,
relatable, and family friendly.
He was clean cut, ran for and
even won political office,
and appeared on television.
But behind that public face was
the racist, anti-semitic, white
supremacist ideas common to the
Klan throughout its history.
I am talking, about David Duke - America’s
best salesman of racial hate, the man
who tried to take the KKK mainstream.
So, let’s get right into it.
David Duke sat in his New Orleans
office at the headquarters of
the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.
His phone rang.
He leaned forward, and picked it up.
On the other end of the phone,
a man introduced himself as Ron
Stallworth, a new Klan applicant
from the Colorado Springs Chapter.
The phone to his ear, Duke began
looking through paperwork until
he found the man’s application.
“There’s been a delay in
getting things processed,” Duke
said, apologising profusely.
In fact, Duke promised that
he would personally process
the application himself.
For a man hoping to join the Klan,
this was some honour - David Duke
was famous, a celebrity of sorts.
Shortly after, Ron Stallworth’s membership
card arrived in Colorado Springs.
He was now a fully-fledged member of the
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, and would
go on to speak on the phone with its
leader, David Duke, once or twice a week.
The only problem?
Ron Stallworth was black,
and David Duke  had no idea.
David Ernest Duke was born
in 1950, in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
His father was an engineer for the
Shell Oil Company, and his mother an
alcoholic who was often disorientated
and distant towards her son.
Because of his father’s job, the young
Duke spent some time living abroad, before
the family eventually settled in New
Orleans, in Louisiana, in the mid-1950s.
Duke, therefore, was a teenager
in the 1960s, the height of racial
tensions in 20th century America.
Though it’s true that his father was
often away and his mother a distant
drunk, it’s hard to pinpoint, or
specify, exactly where or when Duke’s
white supremacist worldview came from.
One biography of Duke suggests that it had
already begun to form when he was just 14
years old, when he wrote an essay arguing
against integration for a class project.
In order to research the paper, Duke went
down to the New Orleans Citizens Council,
one of many anti-integration groups
across the American south at the time.
It was there that he read a book that
argued racial integration was doomed to
fail, and after reading more and more
white supremacist literature he developed
the idea that race and genetics were
the most important aspects of society.
As Duke grew older, the New Orleans
Citizens Council became like his
second home, and he became interested
in Nazism and the Ku Klux Klan.
One neighbour of the Duke family later
said that the teenage David Duke even
had the Nazi flag on his bedroom wall.
The boy then fell under the
influence of a man called Jim
Lindsay,
a Klan leader who stepped in
as a father figure while his
own father, David Duke Sr.
was abroad.
By the time he left high school - an
integrated high school, by the way,
a school with black and white pupils
- Duke was already a fully-fledged
member of the Ku Klux Klan.
In 1968, he enrolled at Louisiana
State University, and first came
to public attention for starting
something called the White Youth
Alliance and for his many racist
and anti-semitic speeches on campus.
He became well-known for
wearing a Nazi swastika,
and
when a civil rights campaigner called
William Kunstler gave a speech at another
university in New Orleans, Duke travelled
there for the event, dressed in full
Nazi uniform and carrying a sign with the
message: "Kunstler is a Communist Jew”.
One contemporary, one colleague from
Duke’s time at university, would later
say that Duke "would talk about 'Mein
Kampf" - Hitler’s political manifesto.
"He would describe how he was going
to become mainstream and get elected
to the legislature,” he said.
It seems that even back then, in
college, Duke already had plans
to take his vile views mainstream,
and into the world of politics.
After graduating from university,
Duke remained involved in fringe
white supremacist groups and protests.
In 1974 he founded an organisation called
“The Knights of the Ku Klux Klan”, a
rebranded, offshoot group that appealed
to traditional Klan members but also
tried to modernise the organisation.
As you may remember from the last
episode, throughout the Klan’s history
there have been several offshoots, such
as the Knights of the White Camelia
and the White Brotherhood, that all
existed under the loosely connected
Klan name, and Duke’s Knights of the
Ku Klux Klan is best understood as
another iteration, another form of this,
rather than a separate or rival group.
The name might have been slightly
different, but the hate was the same.
And Duke continued to make
no secret of his vile views.
That same year, he and a Klan colleague
dressed in blackface - that is,
they painted their faces black - and
they interrupted the unveiling of
a statue of a man called P.B.S.
Pinchback, a black man who was governor
of Louisiana in the Reconstruction era.
Two years later, at the age of 26, Duke
became Grand Wizard, the big boss, the
youngest ever in Klan history, and he
developed a reputation as an efficient
salesman of Klan ideology and literature.
Crucially, he knew about the Klan’s
violent history and viewed it as
baggage, or a distraction, stopping
him from taking his white supremacist
agenda into the political arena.
During his time as leader, he tried to
change and modernise the group, making
it more palatable - more tolerable - to
a mainstream middle-class audience.
Although he was an unashamed racist
and anti-semite, in public Duke tried
to project an image of a well-dressed,
educated, and family-friendly type of
Klansman, one less associated with the
traditional symbols and behaviour of
the organisation’s past iterations.
Under Duke’s leadership, Klan members
were instructed to - and I'm quoting
directly - "get out of the cow
pasture and into hotel meeting rooms.”
Think less rural south, more
suburban middle-management.
Duke renamed the position of Grand
Wizard "National Director" to give it a
more official sounding name, and began
calling cross burnings "illuminations."
As the director of the Klanwatch project
of the Southern Poverty Law Centre put
it: "He used tactics that had never
been used before -- throw away the
robe, put on a three-piece suit, cut
your hair, and get yourself on TV."
Clearly, David Duke was trying to
take white supremacy mainstream.
And not just mainstream TV, he was
making a bid for political power.
In 1975, he had run unsuccessfully
for the Louisiana Senate,
gaining just 11,000 votes.
Although he lost, Duke’s speeches,
rallies and television appearances
gently normalised white supremacist
views as legitimate political
positions, with nice suits and haircuts
in television studios and debates.
By 1980, however, Duke rather suddenly
left the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.
He gave up his position as Grand Wizard
after a dispute with another Klan
leader, Bill Wilkinson, who believed that
Duke had sold a list of Klan members.
You might remember from the last episode
that by this time Ku Klux Klan groups
across the country had been infiltrated
by a targeted campaign of FBI undercover
agents, and as Klan membership declined
in the 1970s, what was left of it became
increasingly distrustful of one another.
After leaving, Duke founded a white
civil rights group called the National
Association for the Advancement of White
People and tried to recover his image,
distancing himself from the KKK and
presenting himself not as anti-black,
or anti-semitic, but pro-white and
pro-Christian, a tactic to try to
normalise his ideas of racial superiority.
Although he would forever be
associated with it, Duke was in
fact the leader of the KKK for
just four years, from 1976 to 1980.
Though his tenure was short, it would
prove to be a very useful stepping
stone for what was coming next, the
political aspirations he had held
ever since his days at university.
In 1988, Duke put himself forward for the
Democratic party presidential nomination
but he failed to win any primaries.
Instead he won the nomination of the
white nationalist Populist Party but
won just 47,000 votes on election day.
The next year, in 1989, however,
Duke finally made his jump into
the mainstream and finally got,
in his eyes, his political reward.
He left the Democrats and joined
the Republican party, and won a
seat in the Louisiana House of
Representatives by a very narrow
margin - taking 50.7 percent of the vote.
Just like Klansmen before him, Duke
capitalised on, or took advantage of,
times of social and economic unrest.
The American economy was
struggling in the mid-1980s.
Duke blamed this on affirmative
action - or positive discrimination
- and capitalised on the fears of
white voters to win election.
Now, Duke didn’t really do anything
of note during his time in office,
preferring to focus on his personal
brand and further trying to
normalise white supremacist views.
In 1990, however, he decided that a
lowly state legislature wasn’t enough
for his ambition and he ran for Senator.
He lost, and the following year, in
1991, he ran for Governor of Louisiana.
Though he did lose the election,
Duke’s white supremacist platform
won him almost half a million votes.
Between the two elections - for
Senator and Governor - Duke won
almost 60 percent of the white vote.
And just like another more recent divisive
figure in American politics, Donald
Trump, David Duke found himself initially
somewhat cast out by the Republican Party.
Some of the biggest Republican figures
in American politics, including
Presidents Reagan and George W.
Bush, publicly criticised
Duke and tried to distance the
party from his abhorrent views.
But like with Trump, his supporters backed
him anyway, and anyone who criticised
him was branded an establishment
liberal, part of the status quo.
I should add here that his political
views weren’t the only unusual,
unorthodox, things in David Duke’s life.
It might not surprise you, but Duke was
an incredibly strange man, and engaged in
many unusual activities, typically with
the aim of either sowing racial division
or personal enrichment, making money.
Normally both.
In the 1970s, he wrote a martial arts
guide for black militants under the
pseudonym, or fake name, "Mohammed X."
Years later Duke would say that it was
an attempt to collect a database of black
people who were potentially anti-white.
During the 1980s, after his
divorce, he wrote a self-help sex
manual for women - writing under
the name of Dorothy Vanderbilt.
He was also implicated in a bizarre plot
to establish a white supremacist regime on
the island of Dominica and attended "white
leadership" training sessions to prepare.
And in 1989, while he was a Member of
the Louisiana House of Representatives,
he reportedly sold Nazi literature
from his office, and it was around
this time that reports emerged that for
many years he had celebrated Hitler’s
birthday - cake included, of course.
Yet perhaps the most remarkably strange
thing from Duke’s life, and an incredible
story that inspired Spike Lee’s film
BlacKkKlansman, was Duke’s relationship
with this man called Ron Stallworth.
Now, if you haven’t seen BlacKkKlansman,
by the way, I thoroughly recommend
it because that initial phone
call we touched on in the
introduction was just the beginning.
As you heard at the start, Ron Stallworth
was African-American, he was black, he
was not your typical member of the KKK.
What I didn’t mention was that he was
also a police officer - the first black
undercover police officer in the history
of the Colorado Springs police department.
Incredibly, Stallworth managed to
infiltrate the Colorado Springs
Chapter of the Ku Klux Klan.
Now, it almost goes without saying that
it would have been incredibly dangerous
- perhaps even fatal - for Stallworth
to infiltrate the group in person.
So how did he do it?
Well, after making initial contact
over the phone, Stallworth built up
a rapport - a relationship - with
local Klan members over the phone,
and sent one of his white - and very
brave - colleagues along to the meetings.
As Stallworth would later write in his
memoir none of the Klan members were ‘the
brightest bulbs in the socket,’ meaning
particularly clever, and nobody noticed
nor asked why Ron Stallworth had one
voice on the phone and another in person.
Incredibly, and this is where it
gets really good, after that initial
phone call with Duke, Stallworth
began a phone correspondence, or
relationship, with David Duke himself
- the national leader of the Klan.
According to Stallworth, the two got
on very well and spoke once or twice
a week - Duke still having absolutely
no idea that Stallworth was black.
In his memoir Stallworth even said that,
“As a matter of fact, when you took away
the topic of white supremacy and K.K.K.
nonsense from discourse with Duke, he
was a very pleasant conversationalist.”
In other words, if you didn’t think
about the fact that he was the
country’s most famous racist, he
was quite a nice man to talk to.
When Stallworth asked Duke if he was
worried that somebody might play a
trick on him, and pretend to be white
on the phone, Duke confidently told
him: “I can tell that you’re white
because you don’t talk like a black
man… you talk like a very smart,
intellectual white man, and I can tell
by the way you pronounce certain words.”
Duke then visited Colorado Spring for the
fake Ron’s initiation to the KKK, and the
real Stallworth was assigned to be Duke’s
personal protection officer for the day.
Now, it might sound like a Hollywood
movie, and of course it was made into one,
but I assure you, this is a true story.
When Stallworth - the real one - arrived,
he told Duke that although he didn’t
respect the KKK he would do his
professional duty and protect him.
Incredibly, Duke never made the
connection that the black man standing
in front of him was the real Ron
Stallworth, the man that he had talked
to for hours over the phone - he
didn’t even recognise his voice.
Duke never realised who Stallworth was
and the story came out decades later.
So, for someone who thought he
was the face of what he called the
‘master race’, perhaps Duke wasn’t
quite as intelligent as he thought.
And it turned out that, aside from
being a famous racist and not as good
as he thought at deciding the colour
of people’s skin from their voice,
like many American politicians, he also
wasn’t very good at paying his taxes.
In December of 2002 Duke was convicted of
tax fraud and served 15 months in prison.
When he got out, he spent time travelling
around Europe giving lectures and making
connections with European neo-nazi groups.
Duke’s focus now was not on the Klan or
racism towards black Americans, but he
developed an obsession with anti-semitic
conspiracies about Judaism and Zionism.
He mingled with Holocaust deniers,
travelling around the world speaking at
anti-Zionist conferences, which is what
he is still doing really to this day.
So, to wrap things up, David Duke
was only leader of the Ku Klux Klan
for a few years in the late-1970s,
during a period when its membership
declined and never really recovered.
Until he became Grand Wizard of
the Ku Klux Klan, it had generally
tried to operate in secret to some
extent, and as a result its leaders
weren’t often in the spotlight.
David Duke tried to change all that.
He put himself front and centre
of the Klan’s activities and white
nationalist ideas, and tried to
cultivate, create, a more professional
and clean cut image for the group.
He swapped white robes and pitchforks
for smart suits and television screens.
The beaming smile, the well-groomed
hairdo, he looked and behaved like tens
of millions of other American businessmen.
But beneath the surface, and not even that
far beneath the surface, he shared the
same hateful ideas as his predecessors.
Fortunately, he seems now to be further
than ever from any real political power
himself, but his political success,
although it was never really a great
success, did a great deal to legitimise
white supremacy on a national level.
And the consequences of this are indirect,
far-reaching, and unfortunately may
not be clear for many years to come.
Ok then, that is it for today’s
episode on David Duke, “America’s most
well-known racist and anti-Semite”,
and not a very nice man indeed.
I hope it was an interesting one,
and whether you knew a lot about
Duke, or this was the first time
you’d heard anything about him, well
I hope you learned something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
What impact and influence do
you think David Duke really had?
What do you think the relative
political success of a man like David
Duke says about American society?
And have you seen the Spike
Lee film, BlacKkKlansman?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.